This is the html version of the file
http://www.weather.gov/noaaport/document/K026report.wpd.
*G o o g l e* automatically generates html versions of documents as we
crawl the web.
To link to or bookmark this page, use the following url:
|http://www.google.com/search?q=cache:V5BZV8XGvJ4J:www.weather.gov/noaaport/document/K026report.wpd+noaaport+frame+loss&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=3&client=firefox-a|

/Google is neither affiliated with the authors of this page nor
responsible for its content./

These search terms have been highlighted: 	*noaaport *	*frame *	*loss *

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
 
 

      *GOES and Non-GOES Imagery Product Compression Approach for External*

      **NOAAPORT *Satellite Broadcast Network Users* 
 

      As part of an effort to achieve better utilization of satellite
bandwidth and allow additional products to be broadcast, several changes
will be made in the distribution of imagery products. 

      Beginning late summer 2003 the National Weather Service (NWS) will
start this effort by first compressing all imagery products on the
*NOAAPORT* SBN, and then combining the compressed GOES-EAST and
GOES-WEST products onto a single GOES channel.  

      Imagery products are identified in the SBN header as product types
of either GOES_EAST(1) or GOES_WEST(2) for GOES imagery and as
NOAAPORT_OPT(3) for other non-GOES or composite imagery.  Imagery
products contain a WMO header (21 bytes) and a Product Definition Block
(PDB), (512 bytes), as defined in the AWIPS/NESDIS Interface Control
Document (ICD).  

      The current format of all imagery products as defined above is as
follows: 

            • WMO header (TTAAII CCCC YYGGgg)

            • Product Definition Block

            • Product data 

      All imagery products will be compressed using the zlib
*frame*-by-*frame* method currently employed for radar products.  The
zlib libraries and user documentation are available at the following
zlib home page Web address: 

      http://www.gzip.org/zlib 

      Once the compression has been implemented, the CONUS imagery
products currently being broadcast on both the GOES-EAST and the
GOES-WEST channel will be combined and broadcast on a single GOES
channel, the former GOES-EAST channel, within the existing 1.5 Mbps
capacity.  Additionally, all OCONUS GOES products for Alaska, Hawaii,
and Puerto Rico sectors along with the existing non-GOES composite
imagery will be broadcast on the 768 Kbps non-GOES imagery/DCP 4th channel. 

      The gzip compression scheme can achieve up to a 5-to-1 ratio on
certain image products.  However, the expected overall gain for the GOES
imagery products using the zlib *frame*-by-*frame* compression approach
is approximately 2 to 1.  Therefore, a single T1 channel of 1.5 Mbps
capacity should accommodate the existing suite of CONUS GOES imagery
products with some additional broadcast delay times introduced during
the overlapped GOES EAST and GOES WEST scan times.

 

 Imagery products will be broadcast with a clear text WMO header
preceding the compressed information to allow product identification
without invoking the zlib decompression routine.  In the first block,
the same WMO header will be included within the compressed block.  The
preceding clear text WMO header can be discarded (or used as
verification against the compressed WMO header) once the product has
been decompressed. 

      All imagery products will continue to be broadcast as HDLC frames
that consist of one or multiple scan lines.  Therefore, blank lines of
the appropriate length can be substituted for missing frames to restore
the decompressed image to its proper overall size. 

      As with the radar products, each *frame* will contain a flag bit
that indicates compression has been applied to this *frame*.  If the
compressed version of a *frame* exceeds the maximum SBN *frame* size of
5,120 bytes of data, that individual *frame* will be left uncompressed. 
Therefore, it is incumbent upon the designer of a *NOAAPORT* Receive
System to verify that each *frame* of the product actually has been
compressed by examining the *frame* compress flag indicator bit.  A
simple call to the zlib decompress library routine for each compressed
*frame* will produce an individual decompressed *frame*.  Since this
compression algorithm is lossless, there is no *loss* of product
information when converting from the transmitted compressed format back
to the original decompressed format. 

      Note that any text product messages (e.g., an administrative
message) transmitted on the GOES channel or non-GOES imagery/DCP 4th
channel will not be compressed. 

*SBN Imagery Product Format Definition* 

      The format of the data fields of an SBN compressed imagery product
will be as follows: 

*_*Frame* #0_* 

******************************************

/Clear Text Data (WMO Header only)/

      - original WMO header (TTAAII CCCC YYGGgg) 

/Compressed Data/

      - WMO header (TTAAII CCCC YYGGgg)

      - Product Definition Block

  ****************************************** 

*_*Frame* #1 - #n_* 

  ******************************************

/Compressed Data/

      - product data block (1 or more image scan lines)

  ******************************************

 

*SBN Product-Definition Header * 

      - Transfer type (flag bit in 2nd octet of Product-Definition Header)

            x10 - *Frame* is compressed via zlib library 

      - Data block offset (7th & 8th octet of Product-Definition Header)

      - offset in bytes to compressed portion of data (from beginning of
      this SBN data *frame*), i.e., length of clear text header (only
      applicable to first *frame* of a compressed product)

