
    Transmission Protocol

EMWIN <http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/index.htm> is designed to be an
open system. The format of the EMWIN datastream
<http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/windat.htm> transmissions is public
domain and presented here. This format is intentionally simple, for
reception by a wide range of user hardware. This format, called the
Quick Block Transfer (QBT) Protocol, is used across all of the EMWIN
dissemination methods, whether Radio
<http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/winrad.htm>, Satellite
<http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/winsat.htm>, Internet
<http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/winnet.htm> or direct cable.

The EMWIN datastream consists of NWS weather products and other data
files. Each product or file, whether ASCII text or binary data, is
divided into 1 KB packets and sent as a series of async 8-bit bytes, N
parity. For example, most current EMWIN Radio
<http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/winrad.htm> broadcasts are receivable,
when demodulated, as async 1200,8,N,1 while the Satellite
<http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/winsat.htm> broadcasts are async
9600,8,N,1.

Each product or file is sent as one or more packets, which are numbered
1..N within the given product. Because the data is packetized, a
particular product can be gracefully interrupted by a high priority
warning or alert product and then resume. Note: the broadcast is
receive-only -- hence the receiver has no means of notifying the
transmitter of any block errors or of requesting retransmission of
individual blocks. Instead each product is usually transmitted at least
twice, to "fill in" any blocks received in error.

Each packet of data contains 1116 bytes, in the following fields:

   1. 6 bytes of ASCII 0 (null) to clear the receiver buffer.
   2. "/PF" followed by an 8-character filename, a period, and a 3-
      character filetype.
   3. "/PN" followed by the block number -- the number of this block
      (1..N) within this file.
   4. "/PT" followed by the total number of blocks (N) being sent for
      this file.
   5. "/CS" followed by a checksum number -- the sum of all bytes in the
      1024-byte data portion of this packet, as a 16-bit unsigned decimal.
   6. "/FD" followed by the date/time stamp of this file -- in the
      format of: MM/DD/YY HH:MM:SS AM, without space padding.
   7. ASCII 32 (SP) fill -- to pad the total bytes in fields 2..8 to a
      full line of 80 bytes.
   8. ASCII 13 (CR) and ASCII 10 (LF) to enhance readability.
   9. the data, as a 1024-byte block; if the remaining data of the
      product is less than 1024 bytes, this block is null-filled so that
      each packet's data block is always 1024 bytes long.
  10. 6 bytes of ASCII 0 (nullNUL) to clear the receiver buffer.

An example of a typical packet header is:

     /PFZFPSFOCA.TXT/PN 3    /PT 5    /CS 63366 /FD2/10/95 5:24:26 PM

The content of the NWS weather products (in the 1024-byte blocks) may be
plain ASCII text or graphics or imagery. The products are not encrypted,
but will often be compressed. Interpretation of the content of the
products is up to the receiver's software. Details of the particular
text, graphics, imagery, and compression formats are given below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Text *:

Text products are transmitted in English and are usually public
forecasts. However, some products may contain a variety of abbreviations
or weather-specific acronyms, or may simply be "readable" tables of
computer-summarized data. The content is generally 7-bit printable ASCII
text, but often also contains hex bytes C5, 80, 03, or 83.

The first line of text of a product is the "WMO" heading
<http://www.nws.noaa.gov/oso/wmohdg.shtml>, which includes a 4-6
character product identifier, a 4 character source site code, and a 6
digit origination date/time (UTC). The next line may contain a AWIPS
identifier, of 4-6 characters portion. In some products the next line
(or embedded lines) may be a "UGC"
<http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/winugc.htm> (Universal Generic Code)
line, giving specific states/zones/counties to which this product
applies, plus a product-purge date/time (UTC).

*Graphics *:

Graphic products are transmitted in NWS Universal Transmission Format
(UTF), a display-independent format. The UTF format includes vectors,
characters, and gridded data, but not bitmaps or rasters, and was
originally designed to be closely compatible with our "legacy hardware"
displays. The EMWIN UTF products are typically national or regional
coarse radar images, that can be zoomed by the display software.

This format is described in AFOS Handbook 5, Volume 6, Part 2, Appendix
B (29 pages), which you can download as a zipped file
<http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/h5v6p2.zip>. This is in WP 5.1 format
(90KB) as a text document plus 11 separate GIF diagrams. You can also
download a small Postscript form of the Handbook, plus source code for
displaying products on Unix, from Maitland Bottoms
<http://iwin.nws.noaa.gov/emwin/maitexit.html>.

If writing your own code, be aware of the "byte stuffing" described on
page B-27. The first line of a graphic product is text, with the NWS
product identifier. This is followed immediately by UTF code bytes, C1
hex and 01 hex, signalling further graphics (in UTF format) or arbitrary
binary contents.

*Imagery *:

Satellite weather images (products from GOES) and other interesting
pictures are transmitted in standard formats as indicated by the
filetype/extension. Currently, .GIF and .JPG are used.

*Compression *:

Local data and watches/warnings/advisories are transmitted as clear text
and not compressed. Other national data products, such as all surface
observations (METARs) for a given hour, are first packed into one "file"
and then compressed and transmitted. The EMWIN "UNPACKER" software task
will decompress these files upon receipt, and then unpack the
constituent data products as if received normally.

The compression/decompression software used is the standard PKUNZIP Data
Compression format.

 
